# Pregled radova
## Structural conformation and leaching from in vitro aged and retrieved Invisalign appliances[^1]
>This effect was confirmed by the GC-MS analysis of the solvent extracts; it showed no residual monomers or oxidative byproducts, even though the polar storage conditions in the ethanol/water solution were much more aggressive relative to the oral environment.
>In vitro aged appliances were found not to release traceable monomers or byproducts after immersion in an ethanol-water solvent.

In vitro nije zabilježen leaching, a ponovno je korištena otopina etanola i vode za koju se tvrdi da je agresivnija u promicanju leachinga iako je u studiji koju smo prethodno komentirali za Invisalign zabilježena upravo suprotna situacija.[^2]
Simultano se suočavamo s drugim problemom koji do sada nije ni razmotren. Leaching očigledno nije jedini mehanizam koji bi mogao dovesti do unosa MP-a, već u obzir treba uzeti i mehaničko oštećivanje proteze:

>Nevertheless, the immersion test might not reflect the degradation potential of these appliances in vivo.7-9 This might be attributed to the fact that during intraoral service the material is subjected to potent abrasion from chewing action, along with attrition induced by the consumption of acidic beverages and the action of enzymes. At pronounced areas such as cusp tips, the movement of opposing teeth during mastication leads to abrasive wear, detachment of particles and gradual levelling of the appliance surfaces. This, however, does not result in cessation of the abrasion, because of the frequent renewal of the appliance sets, which induce another circle of abrasion. The fate of these particles and their biological properties are unknown. In general, particulate forms of polymers might have much higher biological action relative to bulk material because of their increased surface- Fig 2. Polarized reflected light image of Invisalign appliances after intraoral exposure. A, Minimal distortion of surface serrations, B,surface cracking, C, absorption of an amorphous organized integument, and D, calcified regions. Original magnification, 20 X. American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics Volume 126, Number 6 Schuster et al. 727 to-volume ratio and the resultant increased reactivity with the surrounding environment. In the field of orthopedic biomaterials, where this issue has been exhaustively explored, it has been shown that the inert biological performance of ultra high molecular weight polyethylene acetabular sockets results in an inflammatory action induced by particle formation of worn materials.11 Although the orthopedic application might be considered more invasive than the passive placement of aligners, the repeated use of new Invisalign appliances renders the characterization and quantitative aspects of the particle formation of critical importance.

Djelomice ponovljeni zaključak:

>In vitro aged appliances were found not to release traceable monomers or byproducts after immersion in an ethanol-water solvent. The aging pattern of these appliances intraorally involves abrasive wear arising from mastication, and, thus, no definitive consensus on their reactivity and biological properties can yet be established.


[^1]: [Structural conformation and leaching from in vitro aged and retrieved Invisalign appliances](https://bornaborcic.github.io/schuster2004-no leaching.pdf)
[^2]: [Bisphenol A Release from Orthodontic Clear Aligners: An In-Vitro Study](https://bornaborcic.github.io/rpm.2103034.pdf#page=6)
